We Begin tonight with a conflict between
Hezbollah and Israel Israeli leaders
have stepped up their rhetoric in recent
days warning that the Army is preparing
for an offensive along the northern
border with Lebanon the iran-backed
militant group Hezbollah began firing
Rockets as Israel immediately after the
Hamas Terror attacks last October now in
recent weeks attacks have increased with
Hezbollah Rockets sparking massive
wildfires in Northern Israel many of the
homes closed to the Border have been
evacuated for months due to the conflict
tens of thousands of people who fled the
region have no idea when they will be
able to return home the Israeli
government is under increasing pressure
to restore Security in Northern Israel
but does that mean an escalation in the
conflict with Hezbollah is imminent
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu visited areas affected by the
fires today and issued a clear warning
to Hezbollah
anyone who thinks they can hurt us and
we will sit idly by they're making a big
mistake we are prepared for a very
intense operation in the north one way
or another we will restore security to
the
north I'm joined Now by political
analyst and commentator Ronnie shata in
Beirut he's the host of the Beirut banan
podcast which covers modern Lebanese
history Ronnie so good to have you on
the show now Netanyahu says that Israel
is is prepared to act against Hezbollah
how are those comments being viewed in
Lebanon for better or worse this type of
tension along the Lebanese Israeli
border is familiar terrain and this
isn't the first time in Israeli Prime
Minister has threatened further
escalation I think it's also important
to remember that since October 8th a day
after the October 7 tragedy began hb's
calculations in South Lebanon
against Israeli interests in Northern
Israel have also been extremely cautious
so I in my assessment is that despite
the Bluster despite the threats this is
still careful
calculated to a degree escalation but
nothing that's nothing that's not
familiar and the reason I'm using this
word is because for a long time now for
decades South Lebanon has been a
battlefield at times it's quiet at times
it's like today which means there's a
battle field that's being leveraged now
how it's being leveraged is a story in
itself but hb's calculations in 2024 are
very different than hezbollah's
calculations in the 1990s or for that
matter in 2006 I think one of caution I
think is actually extending despite it
being eight months into this
conflict and how has Hezbollah changed
over the years and where does it stand
now that's a great question uh hb's
influence in Lebanon is that an alltime
High hb's leverage against Israel is at
an all-time low and the reason I frame
it this way is because today Iran's
interests in Lebanon are more important
than hb's local Affairs or even for that
matter hb's own calculated interests
Iran does not seem willing to let go of
its Crown Jewel and its Crown Jewel
is's leverage from Lebanon it seems up
until now despite this group having an
enormous amount of Sway and influence on
local Lebanese Affairs and despite of
being able to at times veto political
decisions that have less to do with its
security decision making and despite its
capabilities that are known to Lebanese
hb's actions against Israel are
unfamiliar being that this is the
Palestinian cause this is the raise on
debt for this substate militia in
Lebanon and has been acting extremely
I'll use this word carefully pragmatic
pragmatic for a militia not pragmatic
for any other Lebanese political party
this is a group that stands on its own
in Lebanon and that it has substate
military capabilities but hasbalah right
now despite the escalation despite the
threats from the Israeli side and you're
right Netanyahu is threatening action up
until now it seems like for better or
worse this is the usual in Lebanon yeah
tell us more about hezbollah's ideology
and it's viewed as a terrorist
organization at least in part by the US
by Germany and several other countries
so what does Hezbollah want and how far
have they been willing to go until now
to get
it I appreciate that question I think
it's a complicated question and what
hasbalah wants on local Lebanese issues
may not always match what Iran wants
from hasah but up until October 7 2024
to put it in perspective The South was
fairly quiet to the point that America
time deal was negotiated between Lebanon
and Israel of course indirectly but
hasbalah was on board we have a maritime
deal with the Israelis that's the kind
of climate hasah can succeed in as well
so I I doubt right now the interests for
hasah is an allout war with Israel it
seems more like what Iran needs from
that group and what it needs may not
actually be at the at the same time What
Lebanon can handle and the reason I say
that also is because the Lebanese
economy crashed Lebanese politics is
paralyzed we haven't had a president for
the better part of nearly two years if
not more we have a caretaker prime
minister we have a caretaker government
and we have a country that's
increasingly unfamiliar in terms of
safety local violence is on the rise
this may not be good for hasbalah
longterm but it may actually be better
for Iran in the short term meaning that
they have gained something which is
quite unusual a substate militia in Le
Lebanese politics
that's Lebanon security help save the
Assad regime from crumbling train Iraqi
substate militias and get involved in
Yemen when necessary in addition to all
the other stories that come out from
this group in South America via drug
trade and everything at how a proxy
militia can survive 34 years after the
Civil War ended at an all-time high for
its Weaponry for its survivability so
it's an unusual circumstance I think at
the at the end of the day it's it's the
Lebanese state that pays the heaviest
toll because this state is is wobbling
today yeah now with with these threats
uh coming out of Israel and and you know
the the battlefield that you talked
about before in the South heating up
more and more since October 7th or or
8th the day after um an allout war is on
people's mind and Hezbollah went to war
with Israel in 20 06 I want to know from
you what impact that had on
Lebanon 2006 did several things uh it
showed that hasah can if it deems
necessary cross the border and kidnap
Israeli soldiers and and kill a few as
well and enter a month-long conflict
with Israel that is now referred to as
the July War it can also accept under
Jess a security Council resolution like
1701 and 1701 ended that war it created
the ceasefire that still exists today on
paper at least but it's a it's a
resolution that enhances Lebanese
sovereignty at least on paper and 1701
also did other things it expanded unifil
presence unifil begins in 1978 under
resolution 425 in 2006 we have 1701 that
if I'm not mistaken three-fold increase
in unifil troop presence in the South
and it also did something which I don't
think hasbalah wanted then in terms of
how the war played out is that the
Lebanese Army for the first time since
the Civil War returned to the South
prior to 2006 there was no Lebanese Army
presence in South Lebanon despite
Israel's withdrawal in May 2000 so the
Lebanese Army is there unifil is there
and hasbalah is there right now and if
you fast forward it seems like the terms
of Engagement meaning how this plays out
in the long term Vis hasah and Israel
are being honed in I doubt this is a
call for allout war this is actually
more familiar of how ceasefires were
conducted in the 1990s and it's less to
do with 2006 and the reason I say that
is because hasah is not under Jess the
way it was in August 2006 when 1701 was
acceptable tobah hb's favor actually
this time around is one of Leverage I
think and enhancing maybe what Iran
would like to get out of a regional deal
that has yet to emerge mhm how how big
is of course you know Iran is
hezbollah's biggest backer how big is
their leverage does Hezbollah do
whatever Iran says or is there are there
frictions among leaderships and and can
Hezbollah say you know this is a bridge
too far this is not something that we're
willing to do how far can they can they
work in their own accord
great question there are local issues
that matter to that group in Lebanon and
don't really matter to Iran and there
may actually be at times friction from
security apparatuses you wouldn't
imagine whether it's Iran or even the
Assad regime actually to to go all the
way here the Assad regime as it regains
control in Syria may now always see eye
to eye with hb's presence in Syria and
may seek leverage once more in Lebanon
they that might may not be satisfactory
to H maybe to Iran long term so there is
always a natural friction but in terms
of the the capabilities and the military
interests and the security security of
the Iranian regime hasah is 100% in
alignment on the Lebanese front I don't
think hasbalah is happy with the
economic crash I don't think hasbalah is
happy with the presidential vacuum it
may not be happy that it's pick for the
president has not been acceptable but
that's I think local friction that maybe
Iran May nudge hasah to reconsider but
at the end of the day local interests
for that group and how it survives among
other Lebanese actors that are disarmed
that I think isb's terrain less what
Iran looks at when it comes to Lebanon
but in the bigger picture it is clear
this is Iran's mirror reflection it is a
substate group that manages it is born
out of the 1980s it increases rather
than decreases its presence it becomes
sophisticatedly involved in Regional War
that play out largely in Iran's favor
and it seems to be shielded for the time
being shielded from International
curiosity and how to end this kind of Le
end this kind of nightmare at least when
it comes to the Lebanese Geographic
Battlefield that unfortunately for too
long we as a people have been paying a
price for yeah how has this latest
uptake in in violence and intention
especially in the South been experienced
by communities living on the Lebanese
side of the
Border over 100,000 Southern Lebanese
are out of their homes uh Le South
Lebanon is a war zone um even though it
is it is so familiar to be in the
capital of Lebanon and Beirut and almost
feel like you're not in a war zone but
then you're reminded with flyovers with
the sound on occasion of a sonic boom or
for that matter more recently watching
the news of something that's happening
kilom away there is there is a serious
concern that this could escalate at any
time but it's a stark difference from
2006 when
overnight overnight Lebanon was engaged
it's almost its entire geography engaged
in war Bridges being bombed power plants
being
bombed institutions breaking down in the
middle of war and of course over a
million Southern Lebanese pushed out of
their homes that summer it has not
reached that level yet but I agree age
with the premise in that the threat of
escalation should be taken seriously
even when up until now it doesn't seem
like Iran wants a full out War but they
should be taken seriously and for that
reason alone International engagement
should be focused on how to end this
nightmare rather than kicking the can
down the road which seems to be the
preferred stabilization policies that
keeps leban on a battlefield but brings
back a semblance of quiet for years
until the next round of War
that was Ronnie shata in Beirut thank
you so much for those fascinating and
very thoughtful
insights my pleasure